New Workers tutorial - Automated Analytics Reporting with Cloudflare Workers and Email Routing (#17904)
cloudflare/cloudflare-docs: src/content/docs/workers/tutorials/automated-analytics-reporting/index.mdx

---
updated: 2024-10-31
difficulty: Beginner
content_type: 📝 Tutorial
pcx_content_type: tutorial
title: Automated Analytics Reporting with Cloudflare Workers and Email Routing
products:
  - Workers
  - Email Routing
languages:
  - JavaScript
---

import { Render, PackageManagers } from "~/components";
import { TabItem, Tabs } from "~/components";

In this tutorial, you will create a [Cloudflare Worker](https://workers.cloudflare.com/) that fetches analytics data about your account from Cloudflare's [GraphQL Analytics API](https://developers.cloudflare.com/analytics/graphql-api/). You will be able to view the account analytics data in your browser and receive a scheduled email report.

You will learn:

1. How to create a Worker using the `c3` CLI.
2. How to fetch analytics data from Cloudflare's GraphQL Analytics API.
3. How to send an email with a Worker.
4. How to schedule the Worker to run at a specific time.
5. How to store secrets and environment variables in your Worker.
6. How to test the Worker locally.
7. How to deploy the Worker to Cloudflare's edge network.

## Prerequisites

Before you start, make sure you:

<Render file="prereqs" product="workers" />

> 3. [Add a domain](https://developers.cloudflare.com/fundamentals/setup/manage-domains/add-site/) to your Cloudflare account.

Author: fixed in [dcbc3cf](https://github.com/cloudflare/cloudflare-docs/pull/17904/commits/dcbc3cf36793192bfdaa5fe2a25f8271ad27ecd6)

> 4. [Enable Email Routing](https://developers.cloudflare.com/email-routing/get-started/enable-email-routing/) for your domain.

Author: fixed in [dcbc3cf](https://github.com/cloudflare/cloudflare-docs/pull/17904/commits/dcbc3cf36793192bfdaa5fe2a25f8271ad27ecd6)

5. Create Cloudflare's [Analytics API token](https://developers.cloudflare.com/analytics/graphql-api/getting-started/authentication/api-token-auth/).

## Create a Worker

While you can create a Worker using the Cloudflare dashboard, creating a Worker using the `c3` CLI is recommended as it provides a more streamlined development experience and allows you to test your Worker locally.

First, use the `c3` CLI to create a new Cloudflare Workers project.

<PackageManagers
	type="create"
	pkg="cloudflare@latest"
	args={"account-analytics"}
/>

In this tutorial, we will name our Worker `account-analytics`.

<Render
	file="c3-post-run-steps"
	product="workers"
	params={{
		category: "hello-world",
		type: "Hello World Worker",
		lang: "JavaScript",
	}}
/>

> Now, the worker is set up. Move into that project directory.

Author: fixed in [dcbc3cf](https://github.com/cloudflare/cloudflare-docs/pull/17904/commits/dcbc3cf36793192bfdaa5fe2a25f8271ad27ecd6)

```toml
name = "account-analytics"
main = "src/index.js"

# Set to the current date
compatibility_date = "<>"
compatibility_flags = ["nodejs_compat"]

# Set destination_address to the email address where you want to receive the report
send_email = [
    {name = "ANALYTICS_EMAIL", destination_address = "<>"}
]

# Schedule the Worker to run every day at 10:00 AM
[triggers]
crons = ["0 10 * * *"]

# Enable observability to view Worker logs
[observability]
enabled = true

[vars]
# This value shows the name of the sender in the email
SENDER_NAME = "Cloudflare Analytics Worker"

# This email address will be used as the sender of the email
SENDER_EMAIL = "<>"

# This email address will be used as the recipient of the email
RECIPIENT_EMAIL = "<>"

# This value will be used as the subject of the email
EMAIL_SUBJECT = "Cloudflare Analytics Report"
```

Before you continue, update the following:

1. `compatibility_date` with the current date.
2. `destination_address` with the email address where you want to receive the analytics report.
3. `[VARS]` with the environment variable values you want to use in your Worker.

:::note[IMPORTANT]

> `destination_address` and `RECIPIENT_EMAIL` **must** contain [Email Routing verified email](https://developers.cloudflare.com/email-routing/get-started/enable-email-routing/) address.

Author: fixed in [dcbc3cf](https://github.com/cloudflare/cloudflare-docs/pull/17904/commits/dcbc3cf36793192bfdaa5fe2a25f8271ad27ecd6)

`SENDER_EMAIL` **must** be address on a domain that:

1. Is added to your Cloudflare domain
2. Has Email Routing enabled.
   :::

## Update the Worker code

> While you are in your project directory, open `src/index.js` in your code editor and update it with the following code:

Reviewer: There's a lot happening in the code block below that may confuse some readers. I'd recommend adding some comments as well as breaking each function into a separate step so that you can provide descriptions on what they do. Great work!

Author: Thank you for the feedback! Updated with [505456b](https://github.com/cloudflare/cloudflare-docs/pull/17904/commits/505456b7f9c2b7e888e12925dfb59d5475895767)

## Deploy the Worker and Worker secrets

Once you have tested the Worker locally, you can deploy it to Cloudflare's edge network:

```sh
npx wrangler deploy
```

CLI command will output the URL where your Worker is deployed. Before you can visit this URL in your browser to view the analytics data, you need to add two Worker secrets you already have locally to your deployed Worker:

```sh
npx wrangler secret put <secret>
```

Change `<secret>` with the name of the secret you want to add. Repeat this command for `CF_API_TOKEN` and `CF_ACCOUNT_ID` secrets.

Once you put the secrets, visit the `account-analytics.<YOUR_SUBDOMAIN>.workers.dev` to view the analytics data. You will also receive an email report to the specified recipient email address every day at 10:00 AM.

If you want to disable a public URL for your Worker, you can do so by following these steps:

1. Log in to the [Cloudflare dashboard](https://dash.cloudflare.com).

2. In Account Home, select **Workers & Pages**, and then select `account-analytics` Worker.

3. Go to **Settings** - **Domains & Routes**

4. Click 'Disable' to disable the public `account-analytics.<YOUR_SUBDOMAIN>.workers.dev` URL.

> You have successfully created, tested and deployed a Worker that fetches analytics data from Cloudflare’s GraphQL Analytics API and sends an email report via Email Routing.

Author: fixed in [dcbc3cf](https://github.com/cloudflare/cloudflare-docs/pull/17904/commits/dcbc3cf36793192bfdaa5fe2a25f8271ad27ecd6)

---
updated: 2024-11-20
difficulty: Beginner
content_type: 📝 Tutorial
pcx_content_type: tutorial
title: Automate analytics reporting with Cloudflare Workers and email routing
products:
  - Workers
  - Email Routing

> languages:
>   - JavaScript
> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
spotlight:
  author: Aleksej Komnenovic
  author_bio_link: https://www.linkedin.com/in/komnenovic/
  author_bio_source: LinkedIn
languages:
  - JavaScript
---
```

---
updated: 2024-11-01
difficulty: Beginner
content_type: 📝 Tutorial
pcx_content_type: tutorial

> title: Automated Analytics Reporting with Cloudflare Workers and Email Routing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Automate analytics reporting with Cloudflare Workers and email routing
```

Reviewer: Tiny suggestion on a title change to make it a present tense action to be consistent with our other tutorials.

Author: thanks for the review! updated with [4ccfbc2](https://github.com/cloudflare/cloudflare-docs/pull/17904/commits/4ccfbc2c53824ae90d3d5ab7150dd358e84b5769)

First, use the `c3` CLI to create a new Cloudflare Workers project.

<PackageManagers
	type="create"
	pkg="cloudflare@latest"
	args={"account-analytics"}
/>

In this tutorial, name your Worker as `account-analytics`.

<Render
	file="c3-post-run-steps"
	product="workers"
	params={{
		category: "hello-world",
		type: "Hello World Worker",
		lang: "JavaScript",
	}}
/>

Now, the Worker is set up. Move into your project directory:

```sh
cd account-analytics
```

To continue with this tutorial, install the [`mimetext`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/mimetext) package:

<Tabs> <TabItem label="pnpm">

```sh
pnpm install mimetext
```

</TabItem> <TabItem label="npm">

```sh
npm install mimetext
```

</TabItem> <TabItem label="yarn">

```sh
yarn add mimetext
```

</TabItem> </Tabs>

## 2. Update wrangler.toml file

[`wrangler.toml`](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/wrangler/configuration/) is the configuration file for your Worker. It was created when you ran `c3` CLI. Open `wrangler.toml` in your code editor and update it with the following configuration:

```toml
name = "account-analytics"
main = "src/index.js"

# Set to the current date

> compatibility_date = "<>"

Reviewer 2: Can this be a date, like the date you were writing this tutorial? Devs should change it, but they may not - it should default to something reasonable!

Author: @kristianfreeman thanks for the feedback!

updated with [1925c4c](https://github.com/cloudflare/cloudflare-docs/pull/17904/commits/1925c4cb39d972d61673438b4fe484ba9a79f335)

import { TabItem, Tabs } from "~/components";

In this tutorial, you will create a [Cloudflare Worker](https://workers.cloudflare.com/) that fetches analytics data about your account from Cloudflare's [GraphQL Analytics API](https://developers.cloudflare.com/analytics/graphql-api/). You will be able to view the account analytics data in your browser and receive a scheduled email report.

You will learn:

1. How to create a Worker using the `c3` CLI.
2. How to fetch analytics data from Cloudflare's GraphQL Analytics API.
3. How to send an email with a Worker.
4. How to schedule the Worker to run at a specific time.
5. How to store secrets and environment variables in your Worker.
6. How to test the Worker locally.
7. How to deploy the Worker to Cloudflare's edge network.

## Prerequisites

Before you start, make sure you:

<Render file="prereqs" product="workers" />

3. [Add a domain](/fundamentals/setup/manage-domains/add-site/) to your Cloudflare account.
4. [Enable Email Routing](/email-routing/get-started/enable-email-routing/) for your domain.
5. Create Cloudflare's [Analytics API token](/analytics/graphql-api/getting-started/authentication/api-token-auth/).

> ## Create a Worker

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## 1. Create a Worker
```

While you can create a Worker using the Cloudflare dashboard, creating a Worker using the `c3` CLI is recommended as it provides a more streamlined development experience and allows you to test your Worker locally.

First, use the `c3` CLI to create a new Cloudflare Workers project.

<PackageManagers
	type="create"
	pkg="cloudflare@latest"
	args={"account-analytics"}
/>

> In this tutorial, we will name our Worker `account-analytics`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, name your Worker as `account-analytics`.
```

<Render
	file="c3-post-run-steps"
	product="workers"
	params={{
		category: "hello-world",
		type: "Hello World Worker",
		lang: "JavaScript",
	}}
/>

> Now, the Worker is set up. Move into that project directory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now, the Worker is set up. Move into your project directory:
```

```sh
cd account-analytics
```

> Before we continue with the tutorial, let's install [`mimetext`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/mimetext) package.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To continue with this tutorial, install the [`mimetext`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/mimetext) package:
```

<Tabs> <TabItem label="pnpm">

```sh
pnpm install mimetext
```

</TabItem> <TabItem label="npm">

```sh
npm install mimetext
```

</TabItem> <TabItem label="yarn">

```sh
yarn add mimetext
```

</TabItem> </Tabs>

> ## Update wrangler.toml

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## 2. Update wrangler.toml file
```

[`wrangler.toml`](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/wrangler/configuration/) is the configuration file for your Worker. It was created when you ran `c3` CLI. Open `wrangler.toml` in your code editor and update it with the following configuration:

```toml
name = "account-analytics"
main = "src/index.js"

# Set to the current date
compatibility_date = "<>"
compatibility_flags = ["nodejs_compat"]

# Set destination_address to the email address where you want to receive the report
send_email = [
    {name = "ANALYTICS_EMAIL", destination_address = "<>"}
]

# Schedule the Worker to run every day at 10:00 AM
[triggers]
crons = ["0 10 * * *"]

# Enable observability to view Worker logs
[observability]
enabled = true

[vars]
# This value shows the name of the sender in the email
SENDER_NAME = "Cloudflare Analytics Worker"

# This email address will be used as the sender of the email
SENDER_EMAIL = "<>"

# This email address will be used as the recipient of the email
RECIPIENT_EMAIL = "<>"

# This value will be used as the subject of the email
EMAIL_SUBJECT = "Cloudflare Analytics Report"
```

Before you continue, update the following:

> 1. `compatibility_date` with the current date.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. `compatibility_date`: Enter the current date.
```

> 2. `destination_address` with the email address where you want to receive the analytics report.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. `destination_address`: Enter the email address where you want to receive the analytics report.
```

> 3. `[VARS]` with the environment variable values you want to use in your Worker.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. `[VARS]`: Enter the environment variable values you want to use in your Worker.
```

:::note[IMPORTANT]
`destination_address` and `RECIPIENT_EMAIL` **must** contain [Email Routing verified email](/email-routing/get-started/enable-email-routing/) address.

> `SENDER_EMAIL` **must** be address on a domain that:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`SENDER_EMAIL` **must** be an email address on a domain that is added to your Cloudflare domain and has Email Routing enabled.
```

> 1. Is added to your Cloudflare domain

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> 2. Has Email Routing enabled.

Reviewer 3: Merging points `1.` and `2.` into one line.

   :::

## Update the Worker code

> You will now add the code step by step to the `src/index.js` file. We will explain each part of the code as we go along.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You will now add the code step by step to the `src/index.js` file. This tutorial will explain each part of the code.
```

// Import required modules for email handling
import { EmailMessage } from "cloudflare:email";
import { createMimeMessage } from "mimetext";

export default {
	// HTTP request handler - This Handler is invoked when the Worker is accessed via HTTP
	async fetch(request, env, ctx) {
		try {
			const analyticsData = await fetchAnalytics(env);
			const formattedContent = formatContent(
				analyticsData.data,
				analyticsData.formattedDate,
			);
			return new Response(formattedContent, {
				headers: { "Content-Type": "text/plain" },
			});
		} catch (error) {
			console.error("Error:", error);
			return new Response(`Error: ${error.message}`, {
				status: 500,
				headers: { "Content-Type": "text/plain" },
			});
		}
	},

	// Scheduled task handler - This Handler is invoked via a Cron Trigger
	async scheduled(event, env, ctx) {
		try {
			const analyticsData = await fetchAnalytics(env);
			const formattedContent = formatContent(
				analyticsData.data,
				analyticsData.formattedDate,
			);
			await sendEmail(env, formattedContent);
			console.log("Analytics email sent successfully");
		} catch (error) {
			console.error("Failed to send analytics email:", error);
		}
	},
};
```

> In the code above, we have defined two [Worker Handlers](/workers/runtime-apis/handlers/):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The code above defines two [Worker Handlers](/workers/runtime-apis/handlers/):
```

                                    encryptedBytes
                                    cachedRequests
                                    cachedBytes
                                    threats
                                    browserMap {
                                        pageViews
                                        uaBrowserFamily
                                    }
                                    responseStatusMap {
                                        requests
                                        edgeResponseStatus
                                    }
                                    clientHTTPVersionMap {
                                        requests
                                        clientHTTPProtocol
                                    }
                                }
                            }
                        }
                    }
                }
            `,
			variables: {
				accountTag: env.CF_ACCOUNT_ID,
				date: dateString,
			},
		}),
	});

	const data = await response.json();
	if (data.errors) {
		throw new Error(`GraphQL Error: ${JSON.stringify(data.errors)}`);
	}

	return { data, formattedDate };
}
```

> In the code above, we have defined a function `fetchAnalytics` that fetches analytics data from Cloudflare's GraphQL Analytics API. The function calculates yesterday's date, formats it for display, and sends a GraphQL query to the Analytics API to fetch the analytics data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the code above, the `fetchAnalytics` function fetches analytics data from Cloudflare's GraphQL Analytics API. The `fetchAnalytics` function calculates yesterday's date, formats the date for display, and sends a GraphQL query to the Analytics API to fetch the analytics data.
```

:::note
`env.CF_API_TOKEN` and `env.CF_ACCOUNT_ID` are [Worker Secrets](/workers/configuration/secrets/). These variables are used to authenticate the request and fetch the analytics data for the specified account. You will add these secrets to your Worker after the code is complete.
:::

This function returns the **raw** data for the previous day, including:

- Traffic overview data (Total requests, Page views and Blocked threats)
- Bandwidth data (Total bandwidth, Encrypted bandwidth and Cached bandwidth)

> - Caching & Encryption data (Encrypted requests, Cached requests, Encryption rate and Cache rate)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Caching and Encryption data (Encrypted requests, Cached requests, Encryption rate and Cache rate)
```

- Browser data (Page views by browser)
- HTTP status code data (Requests by status code)
- HTTP version data (Requests by HTTP version)

> This data will be used to generate the analytics report. Let's add the function that formats this data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This data will be used to generate the analytics report. In the following step, you will add the function that formats this data.
```

### Add the email sending function

Add the following function to the `src/index.js` file, below the `formatContent` function:

```js
async function sendEmail(env, content) {
	// Create and configure email message
	const msg = createMimeMessage();

	msg.setSender({
		name: env.SENDER_NAME,
		addr: env.SENDER_EMAIL,
	});

	msg.setRecipient(env.RECIPIENT_EMAIL);
	msg.setSubject(env.EMAIL_SUBJECT);

	msg.addMessage({
		contentType: "text/plain",
		data: content,
	});

	// Send email using Cloudflare Email Routing service
	const message = new EmailMessage(
		env.SENDER_EMAIL,
		env.RECIPIENT_EMAIL,
		msg.asRaw(),
	);

	try {
		await env.ANALYTICS_EMAIL.send(message);
	} catch (error) {
		throw new Error(`Failed to send email: ${error.message}`);
	}
}
```

This function sends an email with the formatted analytics data to the specified recipient email address using Cloudflare's Email Routing service.

:::note
`sendEmail` function uses multiple environment variables that are set in the `wrangler.toml` file.
:::

> ## Test the Worker

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## 4. Test the Worker
```

Now that you have updated the Worker code, you can test it locally using the `wrangler dev` command. This command starts a local server that runs your Worker code.

Before you run the Worker, you need to add two Worker secrets:

- `CF_API_TOKEN`: Cloudflare GraphQL Analytics API token you created earlier.

> - `CF_ACCOUNT_ID`: Your Cloudflare account ID. Can be found in the Cloudflare dashboard under the Workers & Pages Overview tab.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `CF_ACCOUNT_ID`: Your Cloudflare account ID. You can find your account ID in the Cloudflare dashboard under the **Workers & Pages** Overview tab.
```

> Let's create `.dev.vars` file in the root of your project directory and add the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Create a `.dev.vars` file in the root of your project directory and add the following:
```

```sh
CF_API_TOKEN=YOUR_CLOUDFLARE_API_TOKEN
CF_ACCOUNT_ID=YOUR_CLOUDFLARE_ACCOUNT_ID
```

Now, run the Worker locally:

```sh
npx wrangler dev --remote
```

> Open your browser and visit `http://localhost:8787`. You should see the analytics data displayed in your browser.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Open the `http://localhost:8787` URL on your browser. The browser will display analytics data.
```

> ## Deploy the Worker and Worker secrets

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## 5. Deploy the Worker and Worker secrets
```

> Once you have tested the Worker locally, you can deploy it to Cloudflare's edge network:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once you have tested the Worker locally, you can deploy your Worker to Cloudflare's edge network:
```

```sh
npx wrangler deploy
```

> CLI command will output the URL where your Worker is deployed. Before you can visit this URL in your browser to view the analytics data, you need to add two Worker secrets you already have locally to your deployed Worker:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CLI command will output the URL where your Worker is deployed. Before you can use this URL in your browser to view the analytics data, you need to add two Worker secrets you already have locally to your deployed Worker:
```

```sh
npx wrangler secret put <secret>
```

Replace `<secret>` with the name of the secret you want to add. Repeat this command for `CF_API_TOKEN` and `CF_ACCOUNT_ID` secrets.

> Once you put the secrets, visit the `account-analytics.<YOUR_SUBDOMAIN>.workers.dev` to view the analytics data. You will also receive an email report to the specified recipient email address every day at 10:00 AM.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once you put the secrets, preview your analytics data at `account-analytics.<YOUR_SUBDOMAIN>.workers.dev`. You will also receive an email report to the specified recipient email address every day at 10:00 AM.
```

If you want to disable a public URL for your Worker, you can do so by following these steps:

1. Log in to the [Cloudflare dashboard](https://dash.cloudflare.com).

> 2. In Account Home, select **Workers & Pages**, and then select `account-analytics` Worker.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. In Account Home, select **Workers & Pages**, then select `account-analytics` Worker.
```

> 3. Go to **Settings** - **Domains & Routes**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Go to **Settings** > **Domains & Routes**.
```

> 4. Click 'Disable' to disable the public `account-analytics.<YOUR_SUBDOMAIN>.workers.dev` URL.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Select **Disable** to disable the public `account-analytics.<YOUR_SUBDOMAIN>.workers.dev` URL.
```
